Grace, mercy and peace be unto you from our Lord and save you Jesus Christ, again a portion of the Old Testament reading from the book of Deuteronomy.
And he humbled you and let you hunger and fed you with manna which you did not know, nor did your fathers know that he might make you know that man does not live by bread alone, but man lives by every word that comes from the mouth of the Lord.
Your clothing did not wear out on you and your foot did not swell these 40 years.
Know then in your heart
that as a man disciplines his son, the Lord your God disciplines you.
So you shall keep the commandments of the Lord your God by walking in his ways and by fearing him.
You'll join me in a word of prayer.
What God as we gather on this day is we remember to see Christ our king, the king who ruled from the cross where he went for the salvation of the world, the king who rules today in the heavenly throne room, the king who we look forward to being united with,
on the last day.
Let us see him and his great work on our behalf and all the good gifts that you give to us in this life, O Lord.
Let us give thanks for these gifts to use these things well, all that you have entrusted to us, and Lord, let us never forget.
All that you have done for us, all the good things that you have given to your people, and let us remember your good works done on our behalf.
We pray this now in Jesus' name.
Amen.
The congregation may be seated.
This is our command this morning.
You shall remember.
I'll often phrase a command as an invitation and it is an invitation to remember.
You're invited to remember, but it's a bit stronger than an invitation.
What we find here in the book of Deuteronomy says in chapter two of, or in verse two of chapter eight, and you shall remember.
You shall remember the whole way that the Lord your God has led you these 40 years in the wilderness.
This was the command given to the people of Israel.
You shall remember.
You must remember.
To put it another way, it is good for you to remember.
You need to remember.
You're invited to remember.
If you go through the rest of the Old Testament, you realize over and over again
It doesn't always make sense to us.
Why are they going on about remembering, looking back?
But this is what always happens through the Old Testament.
The people are invited by the prophets to look back, to remember.
Remember what the Lord your God did for you.
Remember how God raised up for you forefathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob.
Remember what God did for you, rescuing Noah and his family on the waters.
Remember what God did for you.
rescuing you out of the land of Egypt, bringing you into the wilderness, and finally into land where you would dwell and be prosperous.
But in each of those things, you shall remember, remember what your God has done for you.
It's an important command for us this week as well.
Today, as we combine both Christ the King in this week of Thanksgiving, we remember, we remember Christ our Lord,
The one who came down from the heavenly throne room, who entered this world to walk among us, and then who went to the cross and was placed there, who willingly went there, who ruled from the cross.
And as we see in the Gospel reading this morning, even in that darkest of moments of Jesus' life, of his ruling from the cross, he was speaking words of mercy, of grace, of forgiveness to those around him.
Father, forgive them for they do not know what they do.
and to the thief next to him on the cross, today you will be with me in paradise.
We are invited today to remember Christ our Lord who went there for us and Christ our Lord who now rules in the heavenly realm over all things, the one who was there at the time of creation and brought all things into existence and the one today who still holds all things in his hands.
And we are invited to remember as well those things that he has done in our lives, in our past,
for his church, for his people, and also as we remember to give thanks.
We give thanks because our God is good and today we see again and are reminded again of all the good things that he has done for us.
Our hope is in him and in him alone, so let us remember.
To go back to Deuteronomy chapter eight, sort of like a sermon that Moses preaches to the people as they now have left Egypt and are now in the wilderness area
It's a little surprising, maybe, that God makes this wilderness time so significant that God requires this wilderness time.
These people have just been enslaved in Egypt.
They've been away from their homeland.
They've been slaves to a foreign government, a foreign people away from God, far and isolated.
And when God now finally rescues them, he leads them into the wilderness for 40 years.
You think about it that way, it's kind of surprising.
Why doesn't God just lead them into the promised land?
Haven't they gone through enough?
Haven't they endured enough?
Why doesn't God just take them to the land where He has in mind for them to go and dwell and prosper and live and be fruitful?
That's not what God does.
God allows His people, requires of His people a wilderness experience.
They go into the wilderness.
And what is the wilderness marked by?
and the wilderness is sort of the desolate area, the desert area.
It's marked especially by thorns and by thirst for the people as they're now brought into that land.
It's a land where not much can grow up, where life is hard to find, where there's thorns and thistles, because it's a desolate place.
There's not really enough food to go around, and so the people have to require, and they have to lean on God to provide the food.
And similarly, they thirst.
It's not that there's no water
in the desert, but the water's hard to find there.
It's difficult to get to.
And so again, they thirst.
They need God to provide the water.
So God leads His people into the wilderness.
And what we see in this time is a time of teaching, a time of leaning on God, a time of listening to God's word as we hear here.
You cannot live by bread alone, but man lives by every word that comes from the mouth of the Lord.
So during this time in the wilderness, they are being taught to remember.
To remember the God that rescued them from Egypt, they didn't do it themselves.
They didn't get themselves out.
They were not their own saviors.
God saved them.
And now even as they're in the wilderness, God is providing for them in God's own ways, giving them just what they need, not too much and not too little.
So in this way, they're being taught to remember.
to listen to the word of God, to lean on God's providence.
There will be a day that will come when God will lead them into the land.
That day will come.
God, this is God's promise to them.
They will be led into a good place, into a place where they can prosper, a place where they can dwell in peace, a land that will provide for them plenty and even more than enough.
But what they're being taught here is to remember that it is all God's gift.
And the risk is, we know, and it comes true, sadly, the risk is they would go into that land, the land that God has given them, and that they would stop remembering.
The risk for this people and for all people, us very much included, is that we would forget that we would forget the God who has given us all that we have.
that we would forget what God has done for us in the past.
Now as the people do eventually get into the Promised Land, for a while it goes well for them.
At one point a king named David is raised up and his name is known among the nations and the people's name is known among the nations and a temple is built there in that kingdom and they are prosperous and they are fruitful and for a little while they remember.
The God who has done all of these things for them.
and they worship that God and they give all of their resources to the building of his temple and they do remember and it goes well for a little while.
But then they start to forget and they start to get distracted by the nations around them and the other gods of the other nations who can provide something else that they think that they might want or desire that they think they don't have enough of and slowly over time they start to forget they're no longer remembering.
So that's what this time of wilderness wandering is all about.
It's about learning to remember, learning to hear the word of God, learning to walk with God, learning to be taught by God and shaped by God's commands and not by worldly things.
In many ways, we still live in the wilderness.
And if we can see this and learn from this,
Thank God's work can continue to happen in our lives today.
We can continue to be shaped, but in many ways, we are still in the wilderness.
We are not there yet.
It's not all that hard to see if we look out around ourselves into the world, the many ways that this world is a wilderness.
This world is isolating.
This world is lonely.
This world doesn't have enough to go around.
This world doesn't provide for all people.
This world is just difficult.
and hard there are still thorns and thirst.
We are not there yet.
So what this passage is here to teach us today is to remind us that we need the same teaching, the same remembering, the same reminder that these people needed to walk with the Lord your God.
To remember what God has done for you that all things flow from his hands, from his goodness.
Paul talks about this in 2 Corinthians chapter six.
Paul's talking here to the Christian church about the difficulties that they're going through, but then how they can survive and get through those difficulties and the sufferings and the challenges by holding on to hope.
Paul puts it this way.
As servants of God, we commend ourselves in every way by great endurance and afflictions and hardships and calamities, beatings imprisonment riots and labors sleepless nights and hunger, but by purity and knowledge, by patience and kindness,
by the Holy Spirit and genuine love, by truthful speech, by the power of God, with the weapons of righteousness for the right hand and for the left, through honor and dishonor, through slander and praise, though we are treated as imposters, yet we are true, though we are unknown, yet we are well known as dying, and yet behold, we live.
We are punished, and yet we are not killed.
We live as those who are sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing as poor and yet making many rich.
It would be a great verse to reflect on this week as we get into this Thanksgiving holiday.
Verse 10 of 2 Corinthians chapter 6 says, we are sorrowful and yet always rejoicing.
This is what it means to live in the wilderness of this world.
We face sorrows, we deal with sorrows, we deal with grief and loss and illness and sometimes it just piles up
all on us.
Sometimes we carry it in that burden in a very heavy way and it's right there.
At other times maybe things are going well for us and we can have a little bit of distance from that sorrow.
Yet this is what it means to go through the wilderness of this life.
There will be sorrows, difficulty, thorns and thirst.
And yet somehow Paul says here we can always be rejoicing.
We can always be giving thanks.
We can always remember what God has done for us.
That we are a people of his own creation, a people of his own possessing, a people of his own choosing, a people of his own naming.
We see it in our own baptisms that God has called us by name, chosen us to be his own.
Finally, this morning, as we
seek to remember what God has done for us, as God is the giver of all things, as God is the one who holds us still in his hands, even though we go through the wilderness.
How do we get out of the wilderness?
God didn't create the world to be like this, though it is.
In the beginning, we go back to Genesis and we see the God created the world to be a beautiful garden, a garden that provided for all needs of God's people.
But that garden was changed to a desert, to a wilderness by sin.
Well, what we can't quite see yet, but I hope we can remember, keep our eyes on and not forget, is that even now the desert is being changed back to a garden.
Because you look into the book of Revelation and you see there's a beautiful garden, the heavenly throne room and the heavenly city and the people from the nations gathered around the throne and there's a garden and there's a river that flows through the middle of all of it, the river of life.
How do we get there?
The way to get there is by seeing Christ our Lord.
And it is Jesus God's own son who entered the wilderness.
He came down, you remember his ministry began by him going into the wilderness.
He used the words of Deuteronomy chapter eight to thwart the devil who was tempting him.
But that wilderness actually ended up looking nothing like the ultimate wilderness of the cross, where there were thorns and thirst.
Again, but Christ went there for us.
He entered into the wilderness.
He gave himself into the wilderness.
He gave all of his life.
He poured himself out into the wilderness.
He shed his own blood, his own life, his very being.
In order that, the desert could be changed back to a garden.
And this is happening even now in our lives.
We hold on to his word as we remember, as we give thanks this week.
As we see his generosity, the desert is being changed back to a garden.
in our very beings, in our lives, in ourselves.
And today we remember and we look forward and we have hope as we see that we are made for a kingdom that is yet to come.
We still live in a wilderness now, but God is gathering up His people and will gather them to His side to live in His heavenly dwelling place.
So today and as we go through this week, this is my invitation to you, and even a command, you shall remember.
Remember the Lord, your God, who rescued his people out of Egypt and then taught them in the wilderness.
Remember the Lord, your God, who created you and gave you life and has provided everything you have each and every day.
But most of all, remember the Lord, your God, who gave his own son, Jesus Christ, to endure the wilderness, to go to the place of the cross, of pain and suffering,
so that we could be raised up to new life and life abundant to live with our God forever.
We give thanks for these promises in this word in Jesus' name.
Amen.
The congregation, please stand.
And now may the peace which passes all understanding keep our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Amen.